adr: design discussions (#41973)
quarkusio/quarkus: adr/0006-dev-discussions.adoc

= Setup of Development Discussions  

* Status: proposed
* Date:  2024-07-18

== Context and Problem Statement

Currently development discussions happens in a variety of places, including the mailing list, zulip, github issues, pull-requests, discussions, calls etc.

Its awesome that we have so many ways to communicate, but it also makes it difficult to find the information you need or being able to at least follow certain areas.
 
This ADR proposes to have a more structured way of having development discussions, so that it is easier to find and follow such discussions.

== Decision Drivers

* Enable better open governance
* Prefer async over sync communication
* Avoid requiring to subscribe to a "raging river" of notifications that is not filterable
* Allow use of e-mail as not everyone can/will use web-ui
* Have consistent place to publish and lookup Quarkus development ideas/suggestions

> == Scenarios (optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Scenarios 
```

> Quarkus core developer, where do they best post ideas for suggestion and feedback? Zulip chat? open issue ? submit PR directly ? quarkus-dev ? quarkus discussions ? private chat ? Today all of the above happens based on habbit/or specific requests.
> 
> A dev interested in doing contributions by following the ongoing conversations - which of the many channels does he follow? 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a Quarkus core developer, where do they best post ideas for suggestion and feedback? Zulip chat? Open an issue? Submit a PR directly? Post to quarkus-dev? Open a GitHub discussion? Use private chat? Today all of the above happens based on habit or specific requests.

A dev interested in doing contributions by following the ongoing conversations - which of the many channels do they follow? 
```

> == Considered options (optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Considered options 
```

Primarily use quarkus-dev mailing list::
    Advantages::::
        * well-known and understood by most if not all existing Quarkus contributors (~1000+ subscribers)
        * can post, comment and read with any e-mail client
        * filters out most noise as people need to subscribe
    Disadvantages::::

>         * overtime it has died out, rarely where conversations starts/continues being discussed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        * over time it has died out, rarely where conversations starts/continues being discussed
```

        * e-mail/google groups is just not where new people show up as much now
        * requires subscribing to specific list to post
        * spam (fixed now by moderation)
        * arbitrary blocking of mails (specifally @gsmet and others)

Primarily have "Design Discussions" a sub-category of Quarkus Community/User Discussions::
    Advantages::::
        * Centralized location for discussions, anyone sees it
        * Anyone can read
        * Anyone with GitHub account can post/reply
        * Moderation tools available to battle spam/noise
    Disadvantages::::

>         * Notifications via email comes for *all* discussions, not possible to choose specific category

Reviewer 2: As a note, you can turn off email notifications and use the GitHub notifications panel instead. I've done this and it has been very helpful in controlling email volume.

        * User forums gets intermixed with Developer/Design discussions

Primarily use issues/PR's::
    Advantages::::
        * Conversation directly linked to code changes
    Disadvantages::::
        * Not possible to just monitor the overall design discussions as all mixed up with anything else

>         * Notification filtering is quite limited

Author: ```suggestion
        * Notification filtering is quite limited
        * Limited threading in webui
        * No-threading on email responses
```

        * Cannot be located/found when trying to search for answers/why something was done

Status quo/Do nothing::
    Advantages::::
        * Nothing need to change
    Disadvanteges::::
        * All of the above disadvantages
        * No clear place to go for design discussions

Seperate quarkusio/quarkus-dev repository with discussions::
    Advantages::::
        * Clear place to go for design discussions
        * Easy to find and follow discussions
        * Can filter/focus separately on user versus developer discussions
        * Can use e-mail, at least for commenting
        * ADR can be moved there
        * Future call minutes can be moved there
        * Does not break existing user conversations
    Disadvantages::::
        * Need to move discussions from other places to this new place
        * Need to retire quarkus-dev mailing list
        * Users conversation is in the repo where code is, developer conversation is in a separate repo

== Decision

- Introduce a new GitHub repository called `quarkusio/quarkus-dev`.
  * Have a README with links to discussions, ADRs, call minutes etc.
  * Enable discussions in the repository
  * Use @quarkus-bot for tagging

> - Move existing quarkusio/quarkus ADRs to the new repository

Author: ```suggestion
- Move/Close existing "Design Discussions" to the new repository
- Move existing quarkusio/quarkus ADRs to the new repository
```

  * keep `adr` directory in the main repository with a README pointing to the new location
- Retire `quarkus-dev` mailing list
  * Add a footer to all mails with a message to go to the new repository
  * Change the name of the mailing list to `quarkus-dev-retired`
  * Post last e-mail to the list with a message to go to the new repository
  * Eventually (6-12 months?) enable moderation 
    ** not doing it on day one as it will take a while for 1000+ members to get the message
- Encourage moving Zulip chat introducing/tracking ideas to discussions
  * Encourage summarizing chat outcomes on discussions/issues

> 

Author: - All posts we before did to quarkus-dev Mailing list should go to a category on the quarkus-dev/discussion
    * (pre)release announcement
    * ideas, suggestions, etc.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
- All posts we before did to quarkus-dev Mailing list should go to a category on the quarkus-dev/discussion
    * (pre)release announcement
    * ideas, suggestions, etc.
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
     * Rename `#dev` channel to `#contributors` 
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
- All posts we before did to quarkus-dev Mailing list should go to a category on the quarkus-dev/discussion
    * (pre)release announcement
    * ideas, suggestions, etc.
```

== Consequences

- Can no longer use e-mail cc's to add people into conversatiion. Use @'s to mention github user and if needed forward link to user who are not on github.

- Starting a thread must be done via web-ui; comments and notifications will work with standard mail.

> - move discsuon to issue ends up in quarkus-dev not quarkus repo 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- move discussion to issue ends up in quarkus-dev, not quarkus repo 
```

* Allow use of e-mail as not everyone can/will use web-ui
* Have consistent place to publish and lookup Quarkus development ideas/suggestions

== Scenarios 

For a Quarkus core developer, where do they best post ideas for suggestion and feedback? Zulip chat? Open an issue? Submit a PR directly? Post to quarkus-dev? Open a GitHub discussion? Use private chat? Today all of the above happens based on habit or specific requests.

A dev interested in doing contributions by following the ongoing conversations - which of the many channels do they follow? 

== Considered options 

Primarily use quarkus-dev mailing list::
    Advantages::::
        * well-known and understood by most if not all existing Quarkus contributors (~1000+ subscribers)
        * can post, comment and read with any e-mail client
        * filters out most noise as people need to subscribe
    Disadvantages::::
        * over time it has died out, rarely where conversations starts/continues being discussed
        * e-mail/google groups is just not where new people show up as much now
        * requires subscribing to specific list to post
        * spam (fixed now by moderation)

>         * arbitrary blocking of mails (specifally @gsmet and others)

Reviewer 3: We should also mention that there's a steady stream of user questions on the quarkus-dev mailing list, and every time it happens one of us has to reply to point out it's not a mailing list for users.

Reviewer 4: we should also be prepared, GH Discussion spam happens, too.

Author: I would not call it a "steady stream". It's been reduced greatly ever since we more consistently redirect. But yes it happens. 

Advantage of GitHub discussions here is we can transfer issues to the right place without the poster having to resend. 

I'll add that to list.

Reviewer 3: That's a nice advantage, agreed.

        * User forums gets intermixed with Developer/Design discussions

Primarily use issues/PR's::
    Advantages::::
        * Conversation directly linked to code changes
    Disadvantages::::
        * Not possible to just monitor the overall design discussions as all mixed up with anything else
        * Notification filtering is quite limited
        * Limited threading in webui
        * No-threading on email responses

Primarily use Zulip Chat::
    Advantages::::
        * Real-time communication
    Disadvantages::::
        * Only for those who have time/privilege to follow along

Use private chat/mail::
    Advantages::::
        * Direct and focused private communication (sometimes useful)
    Disadvantages::::
        * Not great for open governance unless culture to comment/report on conclusion somewhere more public
        * Cannot be located/found when trying to search for answers/why something was done

Status quo/Do nothing::
    Advantages::::
        * Nothing need to change
    Disadvanteges::::
        * All of the above disadvantages
        * No clear place to go for design discussions

> Seperate quarkusio/quarkus-dev repository with discussions::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Separate quarkusio/quarkus-dev repository with discussions::
```

> Seperate quarkusio/quarkus-dev repository with discussions::

Reviewer 3: I have a suggestion: What if we called it `quarkus-contrib`? We see confusion with both the `quarkus-dev` google group and the `#dev` zulip channel, because _every single one_ of our users is a developer, by definition. So people think "Awesome! I'm a Quarkus developer, this is the place for me!", and then we have to spend effort re-routing their queries. Using `-contrib` avoids this ambiguity.

Author: I considered it but I when away from it as:

A) quarkus-contributors gets to be quite long and noisy in mail subject
B) "contrib" in many projects is additional stuff outside the main development 
C) If worried about those used to quarkus-dev ml not discovering it reusing the name helps locate it via search. 

WDYT ? Valid arguments ? Asking as I could be swayed both ways. B is my biggest worry but might just be from early days :)

Reviewer 5: Some comments
on A : `[quarkus/quarkus-dev]` will already make it not very usable on mobile emails leaving 10 characters before it hides the rest of the email title.
On C, my personal importance meter rates this not too high

B is real and it adds up with GitHub discovery path difficulties to _Discussions_.

Author: > B is real and it adds up with GitHub discovery path difficulties to _Discussions_.

not sure I follow ? I read it as yes, its problematic to use "-contrib" as it has a specific meaning but then i missed your point on how that connects to discovery path difficulties to discussions?

Reviewer 3: That's a good point about `-contrib` being used for 'extra' stuff.  Using `contrib` for that kind of content is a silly name, IMO, but it's out there. So if the aim is to avoid ambiguity, then `contrib` is no good. So then `contributors` is my best suggestion, but I agree it's long. That's maybe not fatal. Another alternative is `quarkus-design`. Or `quarkus-arch` or `quarkus-architecture`, although that's a bit less differentiated from users, IMO. 

I think @emmanuelbernard's point is that the discovery experience for the new repo won't be great. It won't be the first place people will expect to find design discussions, they're going to need to be directed to it. If the name of the repo looks like it holds additional stuff outside the main development, then it's even harder for people to land in the right place when they want to talk design.

    Advantages::::
        * Clear place to go for design discussions
        * Easy to find and follow discussions
        * Can filter/focus separately on user versus developer discussions
        * Can use e-mail, at least for commenting
        * ADR can be moved there
        * Future call minutes can be moved there
        * Does not break existing user conversations
    Disadvantages::::

>         * Need to move discussions from other places to this new place

Reviewer 3: Is "move" here a move of actual content, or just a move of people's habit? It would be nice to move the content so that people don't have to look in all the old places for old content, post-move, but I'm not sure of a mechanism that could do that. 
Assuming we don't migrate the content, we should add another disadvantage, which is that people either need to check the mailing list + main repo discussions to read historic discussions (increased fragmentation of 'where are discussions'), or we lose all of the historic discussions.

Author: I was thinking about the move of people not content here. 

I didn't consider copying in all the Quarkus dev posts from the last 5 years into the discussions as I don't know of a way to do it efficiently and with proper date. 

Got ideas ? Is it necessary ?

Reviewer 3: It depends what problem we're trying to solve. If we don't do some sort of migration, we're trading off increased fragmentation of information (people looking for information have to look in more places, because the information might be in an old email/discussion-in-the-wrong-repo) against a better experience going forward (we get to use the github discussions interface without user-conversation contamination). Maybe that's an ok tradeoff.
